The Good, the Bad and the Ugly
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = The Good, the Bad and the Ugly  (Il buono, il brutto, il cattivo) | editing        = Eugenio Alabiso Nino Baragli
| studio         = Produzioni Europee Associati (PEA) Arturo González Producciones Cinematográficas Constantin Film  United Artists
| distributor    = PEA   United Artists  
| released       =   
| runtime        = 177 minutes
| country        = Italy West Germany Spain United States 
| image          = Good the bad and the ugly poster.jpg
| caption        = U.S. theatrical release poster
| director       = Sergio Leone
| producer       = Alberto Grimaldi
| screenplay     =    
| story          = Luciano Vincenzoni Sergio Leone
| starring       = Clint Eastwood Lee Van Cleef Aldo Giuffrè Mario Brega Eli Wallach
| music          = Ennio Morricone
| cinematography = Tonino Delli Colli
| language       = Italian English
| budget         = $1.2 million 
| gross          = $25.1 million   
}}
 main theme. It was a co-production between companies in Italy, Spain, West Germany and the United States.

The film is known for Leones use of long shots and close-up cinematography, as well as his distinctive utilization of Aestheticization of violence|violence, Suspense|tension, and stylistic Gunfighter|gunfights. The plot revolves around three gunslingers competing to find fortune in a buried cache of Confederate gold amidst the violent chaos of the American Civil War, while participating in many battles and duels along the way. {{cite encyclopedia| last = Yezbick| first = Daniel| title = The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly| encyclopedia = St. James Encyclopedia of Popular Culture| publisher = Gale Group| year = 2002| url=http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_g1epc/is_tov/ai_2419100524
| accessdate = 2006-05-23}}  The film was the third collaboration between Leone and Clint Eastwood, and the second with Lee Van Cleef.

The Good, the Bad and the Ugly was marketed as the third and final installment in the Dollars Trilogy, following A Fistful of Dollars and For a Few Dollars More. Upon release, the film became a financial success, grossing over $25 million at the box office. Due to general disapproval of the Spaghetti Western genre at the time, critical reception of the film following its release was mixed, but it gained critical acclaim in later years. The Good, the Bad and the Ugly is now seen as a highly influential example of the Western film genre.

==Plot== Western ghost Mexican bandit Tuco Ramirez ("The Ugly") narrowly escapes three bounty hunters, killing two and wounding a third, Elam.

Miles away, Angel Eyes ("The Bad") interrogates former Confederate soldier Stevens about Jackson, a fugitive now calling himself "Bill Carson", who has information about a cache of Confederate gold. Stevens, realizing that Angel Eyes was sent to kill him by Baker, another Confederate soldier, offers Angel Eyes $1,000 to kill Baker. The interrogation concludes with Angel Eyes killing Stevens and his eldest son. He soon collects his fee from Baker, then sadistically kills him as well, thus earning the money Stevens gave him.

Tuco is rescued from three more bounty hunters by Man with No Name|"Blondie" ("The Good"). However, Blondie delivers him to the local sheriff for the $2,000 reward. As Tuco is about to be hanged, Blondie surprises the authorities and frees Tuco by shooting the rope by which he is hanging and holding everyone at bay while Tuco rides off. The two escape and split the reward money, beginning a partnership and lucrative money-making scheme. Eventually Blondie, weary of Tucos complaints about how they split the reward money, abandons him penniless in the desert. Tuco survives and tracks Blondie to a hotel in a town being abandoned by Confederate troops. Tuco tries to force Blondie to hang himself, but when Union shells destroy the hotel, Blondie escapes.

Eventually, Tuco captures Blondie and directs him on a sadistic forced march across the harsh, blistering desert. As Blondie collapses from dehydration, Tuco prepares to shoot him, only to be interrupted by the sight of a runaway carriage. Tuco halts the carriage and finds a wounded and delirious Bill Carson, who promises him $200,000 in stolen Confederate gold, buried in a grave in Sad Hill Cemetery,  in exchange for water. When Tuco returns, he finds Carson dead and Blondie slumped next to him. Before passing out, Blondie reveals that he knows the name on the grave where the gold is buried.
 frontier mission whose head priest is Tucos estranged brother. After Blondie recovers from his ordeal, the two leave in their Confederate uniforms but are captured by a force of Union soldiers and remanded to the POW camp of Batterville. At roll call, Tuco answers for "Bill Carson", drawing the attention of Angel Eyes, who is revealed to be a Union sergeant at the camp. Angel Eyes has Tuco tortured by his henchman, Corporal Wallace, to reveal the location of the gold. Tuco reveals the name of the cemetery, but insists that only Blondie knows the name on the grave. Aware that Blondie will not yield as easily as Tuco, Angel Eyes offers him an equal share of the gold in exchange for his information. Blondie agrees and rides out with Angel Eyes and his gang. Tuco, now a prisoner aboard a Union train in Wallaces custody, manages to kill Wallace and escape.

 , with Tuco seen on the left, Angel-Eyes in the middle, and Blondie on the right. The scene is accompanied by Ennio Morricones "The Trio".]]
Blondie, Angel Eyes, and his henchmen arrive in an evacuated town. Tuco, having fled to the same town, takes a bath in a ramshackle hotel and is surprised by Elam, the bounty hunter. Tuco dispatches Elam easily but his shots attract Blondies attention. After Blondie informs Tuco of Angel Eyess plans, the two renew their old partnership. They kill Angel Eyess men but discover that Angel Eyes has escaped.

Tuco and Blondie make for the cemetery, which is held by Confederate troops on one side of a strategic bridge against the advancing Union troops. Blondie suggests destroying the bridge to disperse the two armies to allow them access to the cemetery. As they rig the bridge with explosives, Tuco suggests that they reveal to each other their half of the secret of where the gold is buried. Tuco reveals the name of the cemetery as Sad Hill, while Blondie reveals the name on the grave as "Arch Stanton." After the explosion and resulting confusion, Tuco steals a horse and rides ahead to claim the gold for himself. After a long search in an enormous cemetery, he locates Arch Stantons grave and begins digging. Blondie arrives and encourages him at gunpoint to continue. A moment later, Angel Eyes surprises them both, also at gunpoint. Blondie kicks open Stantons grave, revealing just a skeleton. Declaring that only he knows the real name of the grave, Blondie writes it on a rock that he places in the cemeterys circular centre, challenging his adversaries to a three-way duel.

The trio stare each other down, calculating strategy and mentally preparing to draw. Angel Eyes draws first, but Blondie fires first, killing him. Tuco discovers that his own gun was unloaded by Blondie the night before. Blondie directs him to a grave beside Arch Stantons marked "Unknown", revealing he wrote nothing on the rock as well.  Tuco finds bags of gold inside and is at first overjoyed, but then looks up to find a hangmans noose prepared for him. Blondie forces Tuco atop an unsteady grave marker, tightens the noose around his neck, then carries off his half of the gold and rides away. As Tuco screams his name after him, Blondies silhouette returns on the horizon, aiming a rifle. With a single gunshot, Blondie severs the rope, dropping Tuco face-first onto his share of the gold. Blondie smiles and rides off as Tuco curses him in rage.

==Cast==

===The trio=== ambivalent partnership. Tuco knows the name of the cemetery where the gold is hidden, but Blondie knows the name of the grave where it is buried, forcing them to work together to find the treasure. In spite of this greedy quest, Blondies pity for the dying soldiers in the chaotic carnage of the War is evident. "Ive never seen so many men wasted so badly," he remarks. He also comforts a dying soldier by laying his coat over him and letting him smoke his cigar.

:Rawhide (TV series)|Rawhide had ended its run as a series in 1966, and at that point neither A Fistful of Dollars nor For a Few Dollars More had been released in the United States. When Leone offered Clint Eastwood a role in his next movie, it was the only big film offer he had; however, Eastwood still needed to be convinced to do it. Leone and his wife traveled to California to persuade him. Two days later, he agreed to make the film upon being paid $250,000 Hughes, p.12  and getting 10% of the profits from the North American markets—a deal with which Leone was not happy. 

:In the original Italian script for the film, he is named "Joe" (his nickname in A Fistful of Dollars), but is referred to as Blondie in the Italian and English dialogue. 

* Lee Van Cleef as Angel Eyes: The Bad, a ruthless, unfeeling, and sociopathic mercenary who always finishes a job he is paid for (which is usually finding—and killing—people). When Blondie and Tuco are captured while posing as Confederate soldiers, Angel Eyes is the Union sergeant who interrogates and has Tuco tortured, eventually learning the name of the cemetery where the gold is buried, but not the name on the tombstone. Angel Eyes forms a fleeting partnership with Blondie, but Tuco and Blondie turn on Angel Eyes when they get their chance.

:Originally, Leone wanted Charles Bronson to play Angel Eyes but he was already committed to playing in The Dirty Dozen (1967). Leone thought about working with Lee Van Cleef again: "I said to myself that Van Cleef had first played a romantic character in For a Few Dollars More. The idea of getting him to play a character who was the opposite of that began to appeal to me." 

:In the original working script, Angel Eyes was named "Banjo", but is referred to as "Sentenza" (meaning "Sentence" or "Judgement") in the Italian version. Clint Eastwood came up with the name Angel Eyes on the set, for his gaunt appearance and expert marksmanship. 

*   bandit who is wanted by the authorities for a long list of crimes. Tuco manages to discover the name of the cemetery where the gold is buried, but he does not know the name of the grave—only Blondie does. This state of affairs forces Tuco to become reluctant partners with Blondie.
 How the West Was Won (1962), in particular, his performance in "The Railroads" scene.  In LA, Leone met Wallach, who was skeptical about playing this type of character again, but after Leone screened the opening credit sequence from For a Few Dollars More, Wallach said: "When do you want me?"  The two men got along famously, sharing the same bizarre sense of humor. Leone allowed Wallach to make changes to his character in terms of his outfit and recurring gestures. Both Eastwood and Van Cleef realized that the character of Tuco was close to Leones heart, and the director and Wallach became good friends. They communicated in French, which Wallach spoke badly and Leone spoke well. Van Cleef observed, "Tuco is the only one of the trio the audience gets to know all about. We meet his brother and find out where he came from and why he became a bandit. But Clints character and Angels remain mysteries." 

:In the theatrical trailer, Angel Eyes is referred to as The Ugly and Tuco, The Bad. Hughes, p.15  This is due to a translation error; the original Italian title translates literally to "The Good  , the Ugly  , the Bad  ".

===Supporting cast===
* Aldo Giuffrè as Captain Clinton. A drunken Union officer who befriends Tuco and Blondie. He feels that the bloody confrontation his men are involved in is a futile waste, and dreams of destroying Branston Bridge—a wish carried out by Blondie and Tuco. Mortally wounded in the ensuing battle, he dies smiling just after hearing the bridges destruction.
* Mario Brega as Corporal Wallace. A thuggish prison guard who works for Angel Eyes and brutally tortures Tuco to get him to reveal the hidden location of the treasure. Angel Eyes turns Tuco over to Wallace so that he can turn Tuco in for the reward money. Tuco, however, kills Wallace and escapes.
* Luigi Pistilli as Father Pablo Ramírez. Tucos brother, a Catholic friar. He holds Tuco in contempt for his choice of life as a bandit, but ultimately loves him.
* Al Mulock as Elam, the one-armed bounty hunter. Wounded by Tuco in the early part of the film, he loses his right arm. He seeks revenge, only to be shot and killed by Tuco, who then proclaims: "When you have to shoot, shoot! Dont talk." 
* Antonio Casas as Stevens. Killed by Angel Eyes, who was paid to carry out the killing by Baker. 
* Antonio Casale as Bill Carson/Jackson.
* Sergio Mendizábal as blond bounty hunter. One of three bounty hunters killed by Blondie during an attempted arrest of Tuco.
* John Bartha as Sheriff. Takes custody of Tuco. Hat shot off by Blondie.
* Claudio Scarchilli as Pedro, a member of Tucos gang. Killed by Blondie.
* Sandro Scarchilli as Chico, a member of Tucos gang. Killed by Blondie.
* Antonio Molino Rojo as Captain Harper, the good captain at the Union prison camp who is slowly losing a leg to gangrene. Harper warns Angel Eyes not to be dishonest on his watch, but Angel Eyes holds him in contempt and deliberately ignores his orders.
* Benito Stefanelli as Angel Eyes gang member. Henchman killed by Tuco. 
* Aldo Sambrell as Angel Eyes gang member. Henchman killed by Blondie.
* Lorenzo Robledo as Clem, henchman sent to follow Blondie when he leaves Angel Eyes hideout, after Tuco kills the bounty hunter. Blondie discovers him and shoots him in the stomach.
*   store keeper robbed by Tuco.
* Livio Lorenzon as Baker, the Confederate soldier involved in the money scheme with Stevens and Carson. Killed by Angel Eyes, who was paid to carry out the killing by Stevens.
* Rada Rassimov as María, a prostitute who is beaten by Angel Eyes for information about Bill Carson. 
* Chelo Alonso as Stevens wife.

==Development==

===Pre-production===
After the success of For a Few Dollars More, executives at United Artists approached the films screenwriter, Luciano Vincenzoni, to sign a contract for the rights to the film and for the next one. He, producer Alberto Grimaldi and Sergio Leone had no plans, but with their blessing, Vincenzoni pitched an idea about "a film about three rogues who are looking for some treasure at the time of the American Civil War."    The studio agreed but wanted to know the cost for this next film. At the same time, Grimaldi was trying to broker his own deal but Vincenzonis idea was more lucrative. The two men struck an agreement with UA for a million dollar budget with the studio advancing $500,000 up front and 50% of the box office takings outside of Italy. The total budget would eventually be $1.2 million. 

Leone built upon the screenwriters original concept to "show the absurdity of war...the Civil War which the characters encounter. In my frame of reference, it is useless, stupid: it does not involve a good cause."  An avid history buff, Leone said, "I had read somewhere that 120,000 people died in Southern camps such as Andersonville prison|Andersonville. I was not ignorant of the fact that there were camps in the North. You always get to hear about the shameful behavior of the losers, never the winners."  The Batterville Camp where Blondie and Tuco are imprisoned was based on steel engravings of Andersonville. Many shots in the film were influenced by archival photographs taken by Mathew Brady. As the film took place during the Civil War, it served as a prequel for the other two films in the trilogy, which took place after the war. Munn, p. 59 

While Leone developed Vincenzonis idea into a script, the screenwriter recommended the comedy-writing team of Agenore Incrucci and Furio Scarpelli to work on it with Leone and Sergio Donati. According to Leone, "I couldnt use a single thing theyd written. It was the grossest deception of my life."  Donati agreed, saying, "There was next to nothing of them in the final script. They only wrote the first part. Just one line."  Vincenzoni claims that he wrote the screenplay in 11 days, but he soon left the project after his relationship with Leone soured. The three main characters all contain autobiographical elements of Leone. In an interview he said, "  has no spirit, hes a professional in the most banal sense of the term. Like a robot. This isnt the case with the other two. On the methodical and careful side of my character, Id be nearer il Biondo (Blondie): but my most profound sympathy always goes towards the Tuco side...He can be touching with all that tenderness and all that wounded humanity." 

Eastwood received a percentage-based salary, unlike the first two films where he received a straight fee salary. When Lee Van Cleef was again cast for another Dollars film, he joked "the only reason they brought me back was because they forgot to kill me off in For A Few Dollars More." 

The films working title was I due magnifici straccioni (The Two Magnificent Tramps). It was changed just before shooting began when Vincenzoni thought up Il buono, il brutto, il cattivo (The Good, the Ugly, the Bad), which Leone loved. In the United States, United Artists considered using the original Italian translation, River of Dollars, or The Man With No Name, but decided on The Good, the Bad and the Ugly. 

===Production===
 
Filming began at the Cinecittà studio in Rome again in mid-May 1966, including the opening scene between Eastwood and Wallach when Blondie captures Tuco for the first time and sends him to jail.  The production then moved on to Spains plateau region near Burgos in the north, which doubled for the southwestern United States, and again shot the western scenes in Almería in the south. Patrick McGillagan (1999). Clint: the life and legend. St. Martins Press. ISBN 978-0312290320 . Roman circus.  For the scene where the bridge was blown up, it had to be filmed twice as in the first take all three cameras were destroyed by the explosion.  Eastwood remembers, "They would care if you were doing a story about Spaniards and about Spain. Then theyd scrutinize you very tough, but the fact that youre doing a western thats supposed to be laid in southwest America or Mexico, they couldnt care less what your story or subject is."  Top Italian cinematographer Tonino Delli Colli was brought in to shoot the film and was prompted by Leone to pay more attention to light than in the previous two films; Ennio Morricone composed the score once again. Leone was instrumental in asking Morricone to compose a track for the final Mexican stand-off scene in the cemetery, asking him to compose what felt like "the corpses were laughing from inside their tombs", and asked Delli Colli to creating a hypnotic whirling effect interspersed with dramatic extreme close ups, to give the audience the impression of a visual ballet.  Filming concluded in July 1966. 

Eastwood was not initially pleased with the script and was concerned he might be upstaged by Wallach, and said to Leone, "In the first film I was alone. In the second, we were two. Here we are three. If it goes on this way, in the next one I will be starring with the American cavalry". McGillagan (1999), p.152  As Eastwood played hard-to-get in accepting the role (inflating his earnings up to $250,000, another Ferrari Eliot (2009), p. 81  and 10% of the profits in the United States when eventually released there), Eastwood was again encountering publicist disputes between Ruth Marsh, who urged him to accept the third film of the trilogy, and the William Morris Agency and Irving Leonard, who were unhappy with Marshs influence on the actor.  Eastwood banished Marsh from having any further influence in his career and he was forced to sack her as his business manager via a letter sent by Frank Wells.  For some time after, Eastwoods publicity was handled by Jerry Pam of Gutman and Pam. McGillagan (1999), p.153  Throughout filming, Eastwood regularly socialized with actor Franco Nero, who was filming Texas, Adios at the time. {{cite video
  | title = Texas, Adios (Franco Nero: Back In The Saddle)
  | medium = DVD
  | publisher = Blue Underground
  | location = Los Angeles, California
  | date = 1966
}} 

Wallach and Eastwood flew to Madrid together and between shooting scenes, Eastwood would relax and practice his golf swing. McGillagan (1999), p.155  Wallach was almost poisoned during filming when he accidentally drank from a bottle of acid that a film technician had set next to his soda bottle. Wallach mentioned this in his autobiography  and complained that while Leone was a brilliant director, he was very lax about ensuring the safety of his actors during dangerous scenes.  For instance, in one scene, where he was to be hanged after a pistol was fired, the horse underneath him was supposed to bolt. While the rope around Wallachs neck was severed, the horse was frightened a little too well. It galloped for about a mile with Wallach still mounted and his hands bound behind his back.  The third time Wallachs life was threatened was during the scene where he and Mario Brega—who are chained together—jump out of a moving train. The jumping part went as planned, but Wallachs life was endangered when his character attempts to sever the chain binding him to the (now dead) henchman. Tuco places the body on the railroad tracks, waiting for the train to roll over the chain and sever it. Wallach, and presumably the entire film crew, were not aware of the heavy iron steps that jutted one foot out of every box car. If Wallach had stood up from his prone position at the wrong time, one of the jutting steps could have decapitated him. 
 The General. 

As an international cast was employed, actors performed in their native languages. Eastwood, Van Cleef and Wallach spoke English, and were dubbed into Italian for the debut release in Rome. For the American version, the lead acting voices were used, but supporting cast members were dubbed into English.  The result is noticeable in the bad synchronization of voices to lip movements on screen; none of the dialogue is completely in sync because Leone rarely shot his scenes with synchronized sound.   May 28, 2009  Various reasons have been cited for this: Leone often liked to play Ennio Morricone|Morricones music over a scene and possibly shout things at the actors to get them in the mood. Leone cared more for visuals than dialogue (his English was limited, at best). Given the technical limitations of the time, it would have been difficult to record the sound cleanly in most of the extremely wide shots Leone frequently used. Also, it was standard practice in Italian films at this time to shoot silently and post-dub. Whatever the actual reason, all dialogue in the film was recorded in post-production.  
Leone was unable to find an actual cemetery for the Sad Hill shootout scene, so the Spanish pyrotechnics chief hired 250 Spanish soldiers to build one in Carazo near Salas de los Infantes, which they completed in two days (at  }}). 

By the end of filming, Eastwood had finally had enough of Leones perfectionist directorial traits. Leone, often forcefully, insisted on shooting scenes from many different angles, paying attention to the most minute of details, which would often exhaust the actors.  Leone, a glutton, was also a source of amusement for his excesses, and Eastwood found a way to deal with the stresses of being directed by him by making jokes about him and nicknamed him "Yosemite Sam" for his bad temperament.  Eastwood was never directed by Leone again, later turning down the role as Harmonica in Once Upon a Time in the West (1968), which Leone had personally flown to Los Angeles to give him the script for. The role eventually went to Charles Bronson. McGillagan (1999), p.158  Years later, Leone exacted his revenge upon Eastwood during the filming of Once Upon a Time in America (1984) when he described Eastwoods abilities as an actor as being like a block of marble or wax and inferior to the acting abilities of Robert De Niro, saying, "Eastwood moves like a sleepwalker between explosions and hails of bullets, and he is always the same—a block of marble. Bobby first of all is an actor, Clint first of all is a star. Bobby suffers, Clint yawns." McGillagan (1999), p. 159  Eastwood later gave his friend the poncho he wore in the three films, where it was hung in a Mexican restaurant in Carmel, California. 

==Themes and cinematography== emphasis on The Great War, a film that screenwriters Luciano Vincenzoni and Age & Scarpelli had contributed to). 
 long drawn and close-up style of filming, which he did by mixing extreme face shots and sweeping long shots. By doing so, Leone managed to stage epic sequences punctuated by extreme eyes and face shots, or hands slowly reaching on a holstered gun.   November 28, 2011  This builds up the tension and suspense by allowing the viewers to savor the performances and character reactions, create a feel of excitement, as well as giving Leone the freedom to film beautiful landscapes.  Leone also incorporated music to heighten up the tension and pressure before and during the films many gunfights. 

In filming the pivotal gunfights, Leone largely removes dialogue to focus more on the actions of the characters, which was important during the films iconic Mexican standoff. This style can also be seen in one of the films protagonist Blondie (aka The Man with No Name), which is described by critics as more defined by his actions than his words.  Aside from Blondie, the two other characters were largely anti-heroes killing for their personal gain. Leone also employed stylistic trick shooting, such as Blondie shooting the hat off a persons head and severing a hangmans noose with a well-placed shot, in many of its iconic shootouts. 

==Release==
The Good, the Bad and the Ugly opened in Italy on December 15, 1966, and grossed $6.3 million at that time. Eliot (2009), p. 88 

In the United States, A Fistful of Dollars was released January 18, 1967 (28 months after its initial Italian release);  For a Few Dollars More was released May 10, 1967 (17 months);  and The Good, the Bad and the Ugly was released December 29, 1967 (12 months).  Thus, all three of Leones Dollars Trilogy films were released in the United States during the same year. The original Italian domestic version was 177 minutes long; {{cite video
  | title = The Good, the Bad & the Ugly (2-Disc Collectors Edition, Reconstructing The Good, the Bad & the Ugly)
  | medium = DVD
  | publisher = Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
  | location = Los Angeles, California
  | date = 1967
}}  but the international version was shown at various lengths. Most prints had a runtime of 161 minutes — 16 minutes shorter than the Italian premiere version — but others ran as short as 148 minutes. {{cite video
  | title = The Good, the Bad & the Ugly (Additional Unseen Footage)
  | medium = DVD
  | publisher = Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
  | location = Los Angeles, California
  | date = 1967
}} 

===Critical reception===
Upon release, The Good, the Bad and the Ugly received criticism for its depiction of violence.    Leone explains that "the killings in my films are exaggerated because I wanted to make a tongue-in-cheek satire on run-of-the-mill westerns... The west was made by violent, uncomplicated men, and it is this strength and simplicity that I try to recapture in my pictures."    To this day, Leones effort to reinvigorate the timeworn Western is widely acknowledged.   

Critical opinion of the film on initial release was mixed as many reviewers at that time looked down on Spaghetti Westerns. In a negative review in The New York Times, critic Renata Adler said that the film "must be the most expensive, pious and repellent movie in the history of its peculiar genre."  Charles Champlin of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the "temptation is hereby proved irresistible to call The Good, The Bad and the Ugly, now playing citywide, The Bad, The Dull, and the Interminable, only because it is." Eliot (2009), p. 86–87  Roger Ebert, who later included the film in his list of Great Movies,    retrospectively noted that in his original review he had "described a four-star movie but only gave it three stars, perhaps because it was a Spaghetti Western and so could not be art". Ebert also points out Leones unique perspective that enables the audience to be closer to the character as we see what he sees.   

 

===Re-evaluation and legacy=== John Fords The Searchers, while also describing the film as "possibly the coolest movie ever made" and praising the influence of the iconic Mexican standoff in film history, calling it as "the greatest showdown ever put to film." WatchMojo also listed the film as Clint Eastwoods greatest movie that made him a household name. 
 Western genre film,    and Quentin Tarantino has called it "the best-directed film of all time" and "the greatest achievement in the history of cinema."    This was reflected in his votes for the 2002 and 2012 Sight & Sound magazine polls, in which he voted for The Good, the Bad and the Ugly as his choice for the best film ever made.   
 Masterpiece collection in the September 2007 issue, and in their poll of "The 500 Greatest Movies", The Good, the Bad and the Ugly was voted in at number 25. In 2014, The Good the Bad and the Ugly was ranked the 47th greatest film ever made on Empire s list of "The 301 Greatest Movies Of All Time" as voted by the magazines readers. 

===Home media=== MGM in 1998. The special features contain 14 minutes of scenes that were cut for the films North American release, including a scene which explains how Angel Eyes came to be waiting for Blondie and Tuco at the Union prison camp. 

In 2002, the film was restored with the 14 minutes of scenes cut for US release re-inserted into the film. Clint Eastwood and Eli Wallach were brought back in to dub their characters lines more than 35 years after the films original release. Voice actor Simon Prescott substituted for Lee Van Cleef who had died in 1989. Other voice actors filled in for actors who had since died. In 2004, MGM released this version in a two-disc special edition DVD. {{cite video
  | title = The Good, the Bad & the Ugly (2-Disc Collectors Edition)
  | medium = DVD
  | publisher = Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
  | location = Los Angeles, California
  | date = 1967
}} 

Disc 1 contains an  ; and a poster gallery. 

This DVD was generally well received, though some purists complained about the re-mixed stereo soundtrack with many completely new sound effects (notably, the gunshots were replaced), with no option for the original soundtrack. At least one scene that was re-inserted had been cut by Leone prior to the films release in Italy, but had been shown once at the Italian premiere. According to Richard Schickel,  Leone willingly cut the scene for pacing reasons; thus, restoring it was contrary to the directors wishes. Cumbow (2008) p.103  MGM re-released the 2004 DVD edition in their "Sergio Leone Anthology" box set in 2007. Also included were the two other "Dollars" films, and A Fistful of Dynamite. On May 12, 2009 the extended version of this movie was released on Blu-ray.  It contains the same special features as the 2004 special edition DVD, except that it includes an added commentary by film historian Sir Christopher Frayling. 

====Deleted scenes====
The following scenes were originally deleted by distributors from the British and American theatrical versions of the film, but were restored after the release of the 2004 Special Edition DVD.  NCO (Víctor Israel, dubbed by Tom Wyner   Retrieved 17 September, 2014.  ) for clues about Bill Carson.
* The sequence with Tuco and Blondie crossing the desert has been extended: Tuco mentally tortures a severely dehydrated Blondie by eating and drinking in front of him.
* Tuco, transporting a dehydrated Blondie, finds a Confederate camp whose occupants tell him that Father Ramirezs monastery is nearby.
* Tuco and Blondie discuss their plans when departing in a wagon from Father Ramirezs monastery.
* A scene where Blondie and Angel Eyes are resting by a creek when a man appears and Blondie shoots him. Angel Eyes asks the rest of his men to come out (all are hidden as well). When the five men come out, Blondie counts them (including Angel Eyes), and concludes that six is the perfect number. Angel Eyes asks him why, mentioning that he had heard that three was the perfect number. Blondie responds that six is the perfect number, because he has six bullets left in his revolver.
* The sequence with Tuco, Blondie and Captain Clinton has been extended: Clinton asks for their names, which they are reluctant to answer.

A scene deleted by Leone after the Rome premiere was also re-inserted:

* After being betrayed by Blondie, surviving the desert on his way to civilization and assembling a good revolver from the parts of worn-out guns being sold at a general store, Tuco meets with members of his gang in a distant cave, where he conspires with them to hunt and kill Blondie.

Additional footage of the sequence where Tuco is tortured by Angel Eyess henchman was discovered. The original negative of this footage was deemed too badly damaged to be used in the theatrical cut, but the footage appears as an extra in the 2004 DVD supplementary features. 

Lost footage of the missing Socorro Sequence where Tuco continues his search for Blondie in a Texican pueblo while Blondie is in a hotel room with a Mexican woman (Silvana Bacci) is reconstructed with photos and unfinished snippets from the French trailer. Also, in the documentary "Reconstructing The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly", what looks to be footage of Tuco lighting cannons before the Ecstasy of Gold sequence appears briefly. None of these scenes or sequences appear in the 2004 re-release, however, but are in the supplementary features.

==Music==
{{Listen
|filename=Ennio_Morricone-The_Good,_The_Bad_And_The_Ugly.ogg
|title=The Good, The Bad And The Ugly main theme
|description=From The Good, the Bad and the Ugly soundtrack by Ennio Morricone
|format=Ogg}}

  prisoners as Tuco is being tortured by Angel Eyes.  The films climax, a three-way Mexican standoff, begins with the melody of "The Ecstasy of Gold" and is followed by "The Trio." Today, the iconic theme is considered as one of the greatest instrumental film scores of all time. 
 The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" was a hit in 1968 with the soundtrack album on the charts for more than a year,  reaching No. 4 on the Billboard (magazine)|Billboard pop album chart and No. 10 on the black album chart.   | accessdate = 2007-05-26 }}  The main theme was also a hit for Hugo Montenegro, whose rendition was a No. 2 Billboard pop single in 1968.   | accessdate = 2007-05-26 }} 
 American New new wave American heavy heavy metal samples on Clint Eastwood", and features references to the actor, with the iconic yell featured in The Good, the Bad and the Uglys score heard at the beginning of the video. 

==In popular culture==
The films title has entered the English language as an idiomatic expression. Typically used when describing something thoroughly, the respective phrases refer to upsides, downsides and the parts that could, or should have been done better, but were not. 

The film was novelized in 1967 by Joe Millard as part of the "Dollars Western" series based on the "Man with No Name". The South Korean western movie  , Stephen King revealed that the film was a primary influence for the Dark Tower series, and that Eastwoods character specifically inspired the creation of Kings protagonist, Roland Deschain.   

==Sequel==
The Good, the Bad and the Ugly is the last film in the Dollars Trilogy, and thus does not have an official sequel. Following the films release, Leone went on to direct two more Westerns (Once Upon a Time in the West and Duck, You Sucker!) and was involved in the production of other Spaghetti Westerns, but none of these bore relations with his previous films.

However, screenwriter Luciano Vincenzoni stated on numerous occasions that he had written a treatment for a sequel, tentatively titled Il buono, il brutto, il cattivo n. 2 (The Good, the Bad and the Ugly 2). According to Vincenzoni and Eli Wallach, the film would have been set 20 years after the original, and would have followed Tuco pursuing Blondies grandson for the gold. Clint Eastwood expressed interest in taking part in the films production, including acting as narrator. Joe Dante and Leone were also approached to direct and produce the film respectively. Eventually, however, the project was vetoed by Leone, as he did not want the original films title or characters to be reused, nor did he want to be involved in another Western film. 

==See also==
*List of films considered the best

==References==
 

===Bibliography===
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  

== Further reading ==
* Charles Leinberger, Ennio Morricones The Good, The Bad And The Ugly: A Film Score Guide. Scarecrow Press, 2004.

==External links==
 
 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*http://www.last.fm/music/New+Order/_/Ruined+in+a+Day/+shoutbox

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 