JFK (film)
{{Infobox film
| name           = JFK
| image          = JFK-poster.png
| caption        = Theatrical release poster
| director       = Oliver Stone
| producer       = Oliver Stone Arnon Milchan A. Kitman Ho
| screenplay     = Oliver Stone Zachary Sklar
| based on       =    
| narrator       = Martin Sheen
| starring       = Kevin Costner Kevin Bacon Tommy Lee Jones Laurie Metcalf Gary Oldman Michael Rooker Jay O. Sanders Sissy Spacek 
| music          = John Williams Robert Richardson
| editing        = Joe Hutshing Pietro Scalia Le Studio Canal+ Regency Enterprises
| distributor    = Warner Bros.
| released       =  
| runtime        = Theatrical cut: 188 minutes   Directors cut|Directors Cut: 206 minutes
| country        = United States
| language       = English
| budget         = $40 million
| gross          = $205,405,498
}} historical legal-conspiracy assassination of President John F. Kennedy and subsequent cover-up through the eyes of former New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison (Kevin Costner).

Garrison  , and the House Select Committee on Assassinations (which concluded that there could have been another assassin shooting with Oswald).

The film was adapted by Stone and Zachary Sklar from the books  " to the Warren Commissions "fictional myth."
 Best Cinematography Best Film Editing. It was the most successful of three films Stone made about the American Presidency, followed later by Nixon (film)|Nixon with Anthony Hopkins in the title role and W. (film)|W. with Josh Brolin as George W. Bush.

==Plot synopsis==
The film opens with newsreel footage, including the farewell address in 1961 of outgoing President Dwight D. Eisenhower, warning about the build-up of the "military-industrial complex". This is followed by a summary of John F. Kennedys years as president, emphasizing the events that, in Stones thesis, would lead to his assassination. This builds to a reconstruction of the assassination on November 22, 1963. New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison subsequently learns about potential links to the assassination in New Orleans. Garrison and his team investigate several possible conspirators, including private pilot David Ferrie, but are forced to let them go after their investigation is publicly rebuked by the federal government. Kennedys suspected assassin Lee Harvey Oswald is killed by Jack Ruby before he can go to trial, and Garrison closes the investigation.
 Secret Service threatened her into saying three shots came from the book depository, revealing changes that were made to her testimony by the Warren Commission. Garrisons staff also test the single bullet theory by aiming an empty rifle from the window through which Oswald was alleged to have shot Kennedy. They conclude that Oswald was too poor a marksman to make the shots, indicating someone else, or multiple marksmen, were involved.
 Secret Service, FBI, and Kennedys vice-president Lyndon Baines Johnson as either co-conspirators or as having motives to cover up the truth of the assassination. X explains that the President was killed because he wanted to pull the United States out of the Vietnam War and dismantle the CIA. X encourages Garrison to keep digging and prosecute New Orleans based international businessman Clay Shaw for his alleged involvement. Upon interrogating Shaw, the businessman denies any knowledge of meeting Ferrie, OKeefe or Oswald, but he is soon charged with conspiring to murder the President.

Some of Garrisons staff begin to doubt his motives and disagree with his methods, so leave investigation. Garrisons marriage is strained when his wife Liz complains that he is spending more time on the case than with his own family. After a sinister phone call is made to their daughter, Liz accuses Garrison of being selfish and attacking Shaw only because of his homosexuality. In addition, the media launches attacks on television and in newspapers attacking Garrisons character and criticizing the way his office is spending taxpayers money. Some key witnesses become scared and refuse to testify while others, such as Ferrie, are killed in suspicious circumstances. Before his death, Ferrie tells Garrison that he believes people are after him, and reveals there was a conspiracy around Kennedys death.

The trial of Clay Shaw takes place in 1969. Garrison presents the court with further evidence of multiple killers and dismissing the single bullet theory, but the jury acquits Shaw after less than one hour of deliberation. The film reflects that members of that jury stated publicly that they believed there was a conspiracy behind the assassination, but not enough evidence to link Shaw to that conspiracy. Shaw died of lung cancer in 1974, but in 1979 Richard Helms testified that Clay Shaw had been a part-time contact of the Domestic Contacts Division of the CIA. The end credits claim that records related to the assassination will be released to the public in 2029.

(Controversy incited by the film led to the creation of the Assassination Records Review Board, which released virtually all such documents. See #Legislative impact|below)

==Cast==
* Kevin Costner as Jim Garrison. For the role, Stone sent copies of the script to Costner, Mel Gibson, and Harrison Ford. Initially, Costner turned Stone down. However, the actors agent, Michael Ovitz, was a big fan of the project and helped Stone convince the actor to take the role. Riordan 1996, p. 363.  Before accepting the role, Costner conducted extensive research on Garrison, including meeting the man and his enemies. Two months after finally signing on to play Garrison in January 1991, his film Dances with Wolves won seven Academy Awards and so his presence greatly enhanced JFK s bankability in the studios eyes. Riordan 1996, p. 368. 
* Kevin Bacon as Willie OKeefe, a composite character who testifies that Bertrand and Shaw are the same person and that he knew Ferrie, and had met Oswald.
* Tommy Lee Jones as Clay Shaw / Clay Bertrand. Jones was originally considered for another role that was ultimately cut from the film and it was Stone who decided to cast him as Shaw. Riordan 1996, p. 370.  In preparation for the film, Jones interviewed Garrison on three different occasions and talked to others who had worked with Shaw and knew him.   
* Joe Pesci as David Ferrie. Stone originally wanted James Woods to play Ferrie, but Woods wanted to play Garrison. Stone also approached Willem Dafoe and John Malkovich, who both turned down the role. 
* Laurie Metcalf as New Orleans Assistant District Attorney Susie Cox defected to the Soviet Union and later returned. He was arrested on suspicion of killing Dallas police officer J.D. Tippit. According to Oldman, very little was written about Oswald in the script. Stone gave him several plane tickets, a list of contacts and told him to do his own research.    Oldman met with Oswalds wife, Marina Oswald|Marina, and her two daughters to prepare for the role. Salewicz 1998, p. 83. 
* Michael Rooker as New Orleans Assistant District Attorney Bill Broussard
* Jay O. Sanders as Lou Ivon
* Sissy Spacek as Liz Garrison, Jim Garrisons wife. Warren Report and spent time living with Marina Oswald. Since the script contained few lines for the Oswalds, Poźniak interviewed acquaintances of the Oswalds in order to improvise her scenes with Gary Oldman. Jack Martin, an American private investigator living in New Orleans. He worked with Guy Banister at Banisters private investigation office. He was the one who implicated Ferrie to Garrison about Kennedys assassination. Democrat from Louisiana from 1948 until 1987. colonel in the United States Air Force|U.S. Air Force, author, banker, and critic of U.S. foreign policy, especially the Central Intelligence Agencys activities. Edward Asner Guy Banister, a career member of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a private investigator. He was an avid anti-communist, member of the Minutemen (anti-Communist organization)|Minutemen, the John Birch Society, Louisiana Committee on Un-American Activities, and publisher of the Louisiana Intelligence Digest.
* Brian Doyle-Murray as Jack Ruby, an American nightclub operator from Dallas, Texas. He was convicted on March 14, 1964 for Oswalds murder on November 24, 1963, two days after Oswald was arrested for Kennedys assassination.
* John Candy as Dean Andrews Jr., an eccentric lawyer who was allegedly called by Shaw to represent Oswald in the assassination case.
* Sally Kirkland as Rose Cheramie, a Dallas prostitute who was allegedly beaten up by Jack Rubys bodyguards. Shes taken to a clinic where she pleads to the doctors that the Mafia is planning on killing President Kennedy.
* Wayne Knight as Numa Bertel
* Vincent DOnofrio as Bill Newman, an eyewitness
 cameo role Perry R. Dutch investigative NOS in the 1960s, had established ties to Kennedys closest circle of advisers. After Kennedys assassination, Oltmans interviewed Lee Harvey Oswalds mother, Marguerite. Further investigation led him to Oswalds babysitter George de Mohrenschildt. According to Oltmans, de Mohrenschildt, who had ties to the CIA, was the assassinations architect. In 1977, de Mohrenschildt agreed to disclose information to Oltmans, but disappeared from their meeting place and was found dead in Florida a few weeks later.   Intent on irony, Oltmans played de Mohrenschildt in the film. 

==Production==
Zachary Sklar, a journalist and a professor of journalism at the Columbia School of Journalism, met Garrison in 1987 and helped him rewrite a manuscript that he was working on about Kennedys assassination. He changed it from a scholarly book in the third person to "a detective story – a whydunit" in the first person.    Sklar edited the book and it was published in 1988. While attending the Latin American Film Festival in Havana, Cuba, Stone met Sheridan Square Press publisher Ellen Ray on an elevator. She had published Jim Garrisons book On the Trail of the Assassins. Riordan 1996, p. 351.  Ray had gone to New Orleans and worked with Garrison in 1967. She gave Stone a copy of Garrisons book and told him to read it. Riordan 1996, p. 352.  He did and quickly bought the film rights with $250,000 of his own money to prevent talk going around the studios about projects he might be developing. Salewicz 1998, p. 80. 

Kennedys assassination had always had a profound effect on Stone: "The Kennedy murder was one of the signal events of the postwar generation, my generation."  Stone met Garrison and grilled him with a variety of questions for three hours. Garrison stood up to Stones questioning and then got up and left. His pride and dignity impressed the director. Riordan 1996, p. 353.  Stones impressions from their meeting were that Garrison "made many mistakes. He trusted a lot of weirdos and followed a lot of fake leads. But he went out on a limb, way out. And he kept going, even when he knew he was facing long odds." Riordan 1996, p. 354. 
 Born on the Fourth of July. Stone read two dozen books on the assassination while Rusconi read between 100 to 200 books on the subject.   
 The Doors, All the The Killing Fields. Riordan 1996, p. 357.  Stone made a handshake deal with Warner Bros. whereby the studio would get all the rights to the film and put up $20 million for the budget. The director did this so that the screenplay wouldnt be widely read and bid on, and he also knew that the material was potentially dangerous and wanted only one studio to finance it. Finally, Stone liked Semels track record of producing political films. 

===Screenplay===
When Stone set out to write the screenplay, he asked Sklar (who also edited Marrs’ book) to co-write it with him and distill the Garrison and Marrs’ books and Rusconis research into a script that would resemble what he called "a great detective movie." Riordan 1996, p. 358.  Stone told Sklar his vision of the film:
  Although he did employ ideas from Rashomon, his principal model for JFK was Z: 
  Stone broke the films structure down into four stories: Garrison investigating the New Orleans connection to the assassination; the research that revealed what Stone calls, "Oswald legend: who he was and how to try to inculcate that"; the recreation of the assassination at Dealey Plaza; and the information that the character of "X" imparts on Garrison, which Stone saw as the "means by which we were able to move between New Orleans, local, into the wider story of Dealey Plaza." Salewicz 1998, pp. 82–83. 
 Air Force Fletcher Prouty, another adviser for the film and who was a military liaison between the CIA and the Pentagon. Meeting Prouty was, for Stone, "one of the most extraordinary afternoons Ive ever spent. Pretty much like in the movie, he just started to talk." Salewicz 1998, pp. 80–81.  According to Stone,  

The screenplays early drafts suggested a four and a half-hour film with a potential budget of United States dollar|$40 million – double what Stone had agreed to with Warner Bros. Riordan 1996, p. 361.  The director knew film mogul Arnon Milchan and met with him to help finance the film. Milchan was eager to work on the project and launch his new company, Regency Films, with a high profile film like JFK. Riordan 1996, p. 365.  Milchan made a deal with Warner Bros. to put up the money for the film. Stone managed to pare down his initial revision, a 190-page draft, to a 156-page shooting script. Riordan 1996, p. 374. 
 Marine who claimed involvement in various CIA activities, and Robert Groden, a photographic expert and longtime JFK assassination researcher and author. Stone 2000, p. 590. 

===Principal photography=== The Longest Day, which he had admired as a child: "It was realistic, but it had a lot of stars...the supporting cast provides a map of the American psyche: familiar, comfortable faces that walk you through a winding path in the dark woods." 
 Robert Richardson City of Hope for John Sayles when he got word that Stone was thinking about making JFK. By the time principal photography wrapped on City of Hope, Richardson was ready to make Stones film. To prepare, Richardson read up on various JFK assassination books starting with On the Trail of the Assassins and Crossfire: The Plot That Killed Kennedy.   
 aspect ratio in order to simulate the TV screens that were available at the time of the assassination, then transition to 1.85:1 when Garrison began his investigation, and finally switch to 2.35:1 for scenes occurring in 1968 and later. However, because of time constraints and logistics, Richardson was forced to abandon this approach. 

Stone wanted to recreate the Kennedy assassination in Dealey Plaza. His producers had to pay the Dallas City Council a substantial amount of money to hire police to reroute traffic and close streets for three weeks. Riordan 1996, p. 371.  He only had ten days to shoot all of the footage he needed and so he used seven cameras (two 35&nbsp;mm and five 16&nbsp;mm) and 14 film stocks.  Getting permission to shoot in the Texas School Book Depository was more difficult. They had to pay $50,000 to put someone in the window from which Oswald was supposed to have shot Kennedy.  They were allowed to film in that location only between certain hours with only five people on the floor at one time: the camera crew, an actor and Stone. Co-producer Clayton Townsend has said that the hardest part was getting the permission to restore the building to the way it looked back in 1963. It took five months of negotiation. 
 35 or 16 or Super 8. In many cases the lighting has to be different." Riordan 1996, p. 377.  For certain shots in the film, Stone employed multiple camera crews shooting at once, using five cameras at the same time in different formats. Richardson said of Stones style of direction, "Oliver disdains convention, he tries to force you into things that are not classic. Theres this constant need to stretch."  This forced the cinematographer to use lighting in diverse positions and rely very little on classic lighting modes. The shoot lasted 79 days with filming finished five months before the release date. Salewicz 1998, p. 84. 

===Editing===
JFK marked a fundamental change in the way that Stone constructed his films: a subjective lateral presentation of the plot, with the editings rhythm carrying the story. Salewicz 1998, p. 85.  Stone brought in Hank Corwin, an editor of commercials, to help edit the film. Stone chose him because his "chaotic mind" was "totally alien to the film form."  Stone remembers that Corwin irritated the more traditional editors working on the film because his "concepts are very commercial sixty-seconds-get-your-attention-fragment-your-mind-make-you-rethink-it. But he had not developed the long form yet. And so a lot of his cuts were very chaotic."  Stone employed extensive use of flashbacks within flashbacks for a specific effect. He said in an interview,   Partially due to a setback that occurred during editing, that saw all the time codes disappear,  JFK would be the last film that Stone edited on film stock before he switched to digital editing.

===Music===
Because of his enormous commitment to Steven Spielbergs Hook (film)|Hook, which opened the same month as JFK, composer John Williams didnt have time to compose a conventional score for the entire film. Instead he composed and conducted six musical sequences in full for JFK before he saw the film in its entirety.    Soon after recording this music, he traveled to New Orleans where Stone was still shooting the film and saw approximately an hours worth of edited footage and some dailies. Williams remembers, "I thought his handling of Lee Harvey Oswald was particularly strong, and I understood some of the atmosphere of the film – the sordid elements, the underside of New Orleans."  Stone and his team then actually cut the film to fit Williams music after the composer had scored and recorded musical cues in addition to the six he had done prior to seeing the film. For the motorcade sequence, Williams described the score he composed as "strongly kinetic music, music of interlocking rhythmic disciplines."  The composer remembered the moment he learned of Kennedys assassination and it stuck with him for years. This was a significant factor in his deciding to work on the film. Williams said, "This is a very resonant subject for people of my generation, and thats why I welcomed the opportunity to participate in this film." 

==Reception==

===Critical reaction===
Based on 55 reviews collected from notable publications by popular review aggregator   stated that the film "tells us that our government cannot be trusted to give an honest account of a Presidential assassination."  Washington Post columnist George Will called Stone "a man of technical skill, scant education and negligible conscience." 

Time (magazine)|Time magazine ran its own critique of the film-in-progress on June 10, 1991 and alleged that Stone was trying to suppress a rival JFK assassination film based on Don DeLillos 1988 novel Libra (novel)|Libra. Stone rebutted these claims in a letter to the magazine. Riordan 1996, p. 386.  The filmmaker ended up splitting his time between making his film, responding to criticism, and conducting a publicity campaign of his own that saw him "omnipresent, from CBS Evening News, to The Oprah Winfrey Show|Oprah."  However, the Lardner Post piece stung the most because Lardner had stolen a copy of the script. Stone recalls, "He had the first draft, and I went through probably six or seven drafts." 

Upon theatrical release, it polarized critics. The New York Times ran an article by Bernard Weinraub entitled, "Hollywood Wonders If Warner Brothers let JFK Go Too Far." The article called for intervention by the studio, asking "At what point does a studio exercise its leverage and blunt the highly charged message of a film maker like Oliver Stone?"  The newspaper also ran a review of the film by  , had her 34-word capsule review for the January issue rejected by her editor John Limpert on the grounds that he didnt want a positive review for a film he felt was "preposterous" associated with the magazine.  Dowell resigned in protest. 

The Miami Herald said about the controversy in its review, "the focus on the trivialities of personality conveniently prevents us from having to confront the tough questions   film raises." Riordan 1996, p. 416.  However, Roger Ebert praised the film in his review for the Chicago Sun-Times, saying,
  Rita Kempley in the Washington Post wrote,  Quoting everyone Shakespeare to Hitler to last = first = title = publisher = Washington Post |date=1991-12-20 |url=http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/movies/videos/jfkrkempley_a0a288.htm accessdate = 2007-03-28}} }}

On Christmas Day, the Los Angeles Times ran a critical article entitled "Suppression of the Facts Grants Stone a Broad Brush." Riordan 1996, pp. 405–406.  New York Newsday followed suit the next day with two articles – "The Blurred Vision of JFK" and "The Many Theories of a Jolly Green Giant." A few days later, the Chicago Sun-Times followed suit with "Stones Film Trashes Facts, Dishonors J.F.K." Jack Valenti, then president and chief executive of the Motion Picture Association of America, denounced Stones film in a seven-page statement. He wrote, "In much the same way, young German boys and girls in 1941 were mesmerized by Leni Riefenstahls Triumph of the Will, in which Adolf Hitler was depicted as a newborn God. Both JFK and Triumph of the Will are equally a propaganda masterpiece and equally a hoax. Mr. Stone and Leni Riefenstahl have another genetic linkage: neither of them carried a disclaimer on their film that its contents were mostly pure fiction." 

Stone recalls in an interview, "I cant even remember all the threats, there were so many of them."  Time magazine ranked it the fourth best film of 1991.  Roger Ebert went on to name Stones film as the best film of the year and one of the top ten films of the decade, as well as one of The Great Movies.    The Sydney Morning Herald named JFK as the best film of 1991.  Entertainment Weekly ranked it the 5th Most Controversial Movie Ever.   

Years after its release, Stone said of the film that it "was the beginning of a new era for me in terms of film making because its not just about a conspiracy to kill John Kennedy. Its also about the way we look at our recent history...It shifts from black and white to color, and then back again, and views people from offbeat angles."   

In his book  , a history of the assassination published 16 years after the films release, Vincent Bugliosi devoted an entire chapter to Garrisons prosecution of Shaw and Stones subsequent film.  Bugliosi lists thirty-two separate "lies and fabrications"  in Stones film and describes the film as "one continuous lie in which Stone couldnt find any level of deception and invention beyond which he was unwilling to go."  David Wrone stated that "80 percent of the film is in factual error" and rejected the premise of a conspiracy involving the CIA and the so-called military-industrial complex as "irrational."    Warren Commission investigator David Belin called the film "a big lie that would make Adolf Hitler proud".   

===Box office===
JFK was released in theaters on December 20, 1991. Box office started slow but picked up momentum and by the first week in January 1992, it had grossed over USD|$50 million worldwide. Stone started to get support for his film. Warner Brothers executives pointed out that because of the films long running time, it had fewer screenings.  The studio undertook a $15 million marketing campaign promoting Stones film. 
 Beauty and the Beast for fifth place in the U.S. box office and its critics began to say it was a Box office bomb|flop.  However, JFK eventually earned over $200 million worldwide, and $70 million in the United States during its initial run.  Garrisons estate subsequently sued Warner Bros. for a share of the films profits, alleging a book-keeping practice known as "Hollywood accounting."    The lawsuit contends that JFK made in excess of $150 million worldwide but the studio claimed that the film did not earn any money under its "net profits" accounting formula. The suit also claims that Garrisons estate didnt receive any of the net profits income. He should have been paid more than $1 million. 

===Awards and nominations=== Best Picture, Best Actor Best Director Best Original Best Sound Best Cinematography Best Film Best Adapted Screenplay (Stone and Zachary Sklar).     It won two awards, for Best Cinematography and Best Film Editing.   
 award for Best Director and in his acceptance speech, he said, "A terrible lie was told to us 28 years ago. I hope that this film can be the first step in righting that wrong."   

Entertainment Weekly ranked JFK as one of the 25 "Powerful Political Thrillers".   

===Cultural impact=== Magic Bullet The Boyfriend") where Kramer and Newman believe that they had been spat at by New York Met Keith Hernandez, who later reveals that there had been a second spitter, Roger McDowell. Wayne Knight, who plays Newman, is also in JFK as a member of Garrisons team. He would be one of the two men to model the shooting in court to prove the implausibility of the "magic bullet," not unlike how Jerry disproves Newman and Kramers theory of the "magic loogie."  In each case, Knight played the second victim in the sequence, John Connally and Newman, respectively.

The film is mentioned in the popular 90s sitcom Family Matters, where the dim-witted character Waldo Faldo (Shawn Harrison) mentions that he and his date Laura (Kellie Williams) shouldve seen JFK (which he pronounces phonetically as "Jif-kah") because the film they had chosen(The Prince Of Tides) did not feature any surfing, despite its title.  When Laura realized what he meant and corrects him, he retorts with "I know how its spelled!"  It is mentioned in another episode he describes another date with future girlfriend Maxine (Cherie Johnson) where he says they saw "Malcolm 10" (him believing the X in Malcolm X was 10 in Roman numerals and not seeing Malcolms 1-9) and saying "It was either that or "Jif-kah".

==Legislative impact==
 
The films popularity led to the passage of the President John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of 1992 (also known as the JFK Act) and the formation of the U.S. Assassination Records Review Board. The Act was signed into law by President George H. W. Bush in late October 1992.    The ARRB worked until 1998. Witnesses were interviewed (some for the first time), including many medical witnesses, the U.S. government purchased the Zapruder film, and previously-classified documents relating to the assassination were finally made public. By ARRB law (of 1998), all existing assassination-related documents will be made public by 2017.   

==Home video==
JFK has been released on VHS, Laserdisc|LaserDisc, and several times on DVD. The films only version ever released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc|Blu-ray in the United States is the 206-minute "Directors Cut". The theatrical cut has been released on DVD in only a few foreign territories, including the UK. In 2001, the "Directors Cut" was released as part of the Oliver Stone Collection box set with the film on one disc and supplemental material on the second. Stone contributed several extras to this edition, including an audio commentary, two multimedia essays, and 54 minutes worth of Deleted scene|deleted/extended scenes with optional commentary by Stone.    In 2003, a two-DVD "Special Edition" was released with all of the extras on the 2001 edition in addition to a 90-minute documentary entitled, Beyond JFK: The Question of Conspiracy.   

The film was released on Blu-ray on November 11, 2008. The disc features many of the extras included on the previous DVD releases, including the Beyond JFK: The Question of Conspiracy documentary.  

==See also==
 
*Pseudo-documentary
*Cultural depictions of John F. Kennedy

==References==
 
* Riordan, James (September 1996) Stone: A Biography of Oliver Stone. New York: Aurum Press. ISBN 1-85410-444-6
* Salewicz, Chris (February 1998) Oliver Stone: Close Up: The Making of His Movies. Thunders Mouth Press. ISBN 0-7528-1820-1
* Stone, Oliver (February 2000) JFK: The Book of the Film. New York: Applause Books. ISBN 1-55783-127-0
;Further reading
*  
*  
*  
* Robert Brent Toplin (1996). History by Hollywood "JFK: Fact, Fiction, and Supposition," pp.&nbsp;45–78. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-06536-0

==External links==
 
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  , Sam Smith, Progressive Review, February 1992

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 