Forrest Gump
 
 
 
 
{{Infobox film
| name = Forrest Gump
| image = Forrest Gump poster.jpg
| border = yes
| caption = Theatrical release poster
| alt = Film poster with an all-white background, and a park bench (facing away from the viewer) near the bottom. A man wearing a white suit is sitting on the right side of the bench and is looking to his left while resting his hands on both sides of him on the bench. A suitcase is sitting on the ground, and the man is wearing tennis shoes. At the top left of the image is the films tagline and title, and at the bottom is the release date and production credits.
| director = Robert Zemeckis
| producer = Wendy Finerman Steve Tisch Steve Starkey Charles Newirth
| based on =  
| screenplay = Eric Roth
| narrator =  
| starring = Tom Hanks Robin Wright Gary Sinise Mykelti Williamson Sally Field
| music = Alan Silvestri Don Burgess Arthur Schmidt
| studio = Paramount Pictures
| distributor = Paramount Pictures
| released =  
| runtime = 142&nbsp;minutes
| country = United States
| language = English
| budget = $55&nbsp;million 
| gross = $677.9 million 
}} epic Romantic novel of the same name by Winston Groom. The film was directed by Robert Zemeckis and stars Tom Hanks, Robin Wright, Gary Sinise, Mykelti Williamson, and Sally Field. The story depicts several decades in the life of Forrest Gump, a Intellectual disability|slow-witted and naïve, but good-hearted and athletically prodigious, man from Alabama who witnesses, and in some cases influences, some of the defining events of the latter half of the 20th century in the United States; more specifically, the period between Forrests birth in 1944 and 1982. The film differs substantially from Winston Grooms novel on which it was based, including Gumps personality and several events that were depicted.
 visual effects comprehensive soundtrack was featured in the film, using music intended to pinpoint specific time periods portrayed on screen. Its commercial release made it a top-selling soundtrack, selling over twelve million copies worldwide.
 Best Picture, Best Director Best Actor Best Adapted Best Visual Best Film Editing. It also garnered multiple other awards and nominations, including Golden Globes, Peoples Choice Awards, and Young Artist Awards, among others. Since the films release varying interpretations have been made of the films protagonist and its political symbolism. In 1996, a themed restaurant, Bubba Gump Shrimp Company, opened based on the film and has since expanded to multiple locations worldwide. The scene of Gump running across the country is often referred to when real-life people attempt the feat.  In 2011, the Library of Congress selected Forrest Gump for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".     

==Plot==
<!--

This plot summary has enough detail. WP:Filmplot states that plot summaries should be no more than 700 words; this summary is roughly 650.

--> Forrest Gump (Tom Hanks) begins telling his life story to strangers who sit next to him on the bench. His story begins with his being named for a relative, Nathan Bedford Forrest, and proceeds to the leg braces he had to wear as a child in the 1950s, which resulted in other children bullying him. He lives with his mother (Sally Field), who tells him that "stupid is as stupid does." His mother runs a rooming house and Forrest teaches one of their guests, a young Elvis Presley (Peter Dobson), a hip-swinging dance. On a bus for his first day of school, Forrest meets Jenny (Robin Wright), with whom he immediately falls in love, and they become best friends. One day, while fleeing from bullies, Forrests leg braces break apart and he discovers that he can run very fast. Despite his below-average intelligence, his speed earns him an athletic scholarship to the University of Alabama. While in college, he witnesses George Wallaces Stand in the Schoolhouse Door, is named an College Football All-America Team|All-American football player, and meets President John F. Kennedy.

After graduating, Forrest enlists in the United States Army, where he befriends former shrimp fisherman Benjamin Buford "Bubba" Blue (Mykelti Williamson), and they agree to go into the shrimping business together once they end their service. They are sent to Vietnam War|Vietnam, and while on patrol their platoon is ambushed. Forrest saves four of the men in his platoon, including platoon leader First Lieutenant Dan Taylor (Gary Sinise), but Bubba is killed. Forrest himself is wounded and receives the Medal of Honor from President Lyndon B. Johnson. While recovering from his injuries, Forrest meets Lieutenant Dan, who has had both of his legs amputated due to his injuries. He is furious at Forrest for leaving him a "cripple" and cheating him out of his destiny to die in battle.
 ping pong goodwill tour. Watergate hotel, where Forrest inadvertently helps expose the Watergate scandal. He again encounters Lieutenant Dan, now an embittered drunk living on welfare. Dan is scornful of Forrests plans to enter the shrimping business and mockingly promises to be Forrests first mate if he ever succeeds.  The two go back to Dans hotel room with two prostitutes, but Forrest rejects one of the prostitutes advances.  When the other one calls Forrest "stupid," Dan surprisingly defends Forrest, demands that they never call him stupid, and kicks the prostitutes out of his hotel room.
 shrimping boat, some kind of fruit company", making them both wealthy.

Jenny returns to visit Forrest and stays with him. He proposes but she turns him down. They have sexual intercourse, but she quietly leaves the next morning. Distraught at discovering this, Forrest decides to go for a run, which turns into a three-year coast-to-coast marathon. Forrest becomes a celebrity, attracting a band of followers. One day he stops his marathon suddenly and returns home, where he receives a letter from Jenny asking to meet.

This brings Forrest to the bus stop where he began telling his story at the start of the film. During his reunion with Jenny, Forrest discovers they have a young son, also named Forrest (Haley Joel Osment). Jenny reveals that she is suffering from an unspecified viral illness, presumably HIV/AIDS. She proposes and he accepts, and they return to Alabama with Forrest Jr. and marry. At his wedding, he meets Lieutenant Dan, who now has titanium alloy prosthetic legs and can walk, as well as his fiancee.

Eventually, Jenny dies of her illness. Forrest waits with Forrest Jr. for the bus to pick him up for his first day of school, and watches his feather bookmark float off in the wind.

==Cast==
{{multiple image
| direction = horizontal
| footer = Tom Hanks (left) and Gary Sinise on the film set in 1993.
| image1 = TomHanksForrestGump94.jpg
| width1 = 149
| alt1 = A man is at the center of the image smiling into the camera. He is sitting on a blue crate and has his hands resting on his legs.
| image2 = GarySiniseDanTaylorForrestGump94.jpg
| width2 = 160
| alt2 = A man is at the center of the image looking at the camera. He is dressed in Vietnam-era military attire
}} Bob Zemeckis to portray the heavy accent stressed in the novel.  Hanks agreed to take the role only on the condition that the film was historically accurate. Michael Conner Humphreys portrayed the young Forrest Gump. Hanks revealed in interviews that after hearing Michaels unique accented drawl, he incorporated it into the older characters accent. Winston Groom, who wrote the original novel, describes the film as having taken the "rough edges" off of the character, and envisioned him being played by John Goodman. 
*   at the hands of her bitterly widowed father, Jenny embarks on a different path than Forrest, leading a self-destructive life and becoming part of the hippie movement in the 1960s and the 1970s/1980s drug culture. She re-enters Forrests life at various times in adulthood. Jenny eventually becomes a waitress in Savannah, Georgia, where she lives in an apartment with her (and Forrests) son, Forrest Jr. They eventually get married, but soon afterwards she dies of an unspecified illness caused by a kind of virus, though it is heavily implied to be HIV/AIDS. Hanna R. Hall portrayed the young Jenny. prosthetics which allow him to walk again.
*  , Ice Cube and Dave Chappelle were all offered the role before turning it down.     Chappelle claimed he believed the film would be unsuccessful and has also admitted that he regrets not taking the role. 
* Sally Field as Mrs. Gump: Forrests devoted mother, who raises him after his father abandons them. Field reflected on the character, "Shes a woman who loves her son unconditionally. ... A lot of her dialogue sounds like slogans, and thats just what she intends."   
*   commercial.    Elvis in the scene where Elvis meets Forrest.    makeup applied cameo role archival footage like John Lennon or President Kennedy   
* Sam Anderson as Principal Hancock: Forrests elementary school principal.
*   group and Jennys abusive boyfriend.
* Siobhan Fallon Hogan as Dorothy Harris: The school bus driver who drives both Forrest, and later his son, to school. Paul "Bear" Bryant: Forrests football coach at the University of Alabama.
*  , and anti-black racism.

==Production==

===Script===
 
  novel by Winston Groom. Both center on the character of Forrest Gump. However, the film primarily focuses on the first eleven chapters of the novel, before skipping ahead to the end of the novel with the founding of Bubba Gump Shrimp Co. and the meeting with Forrest, Jr. In addition to skipping some parts of the novel, the film adds several aspects to Gumps life that do not occur in the novel, such as his needing leg braces as a child and his run across the United States.   
 autistic savant—in professional wrestler, and a chess player. 

Two directors were offered the opportunity to direct the film before Robert Zemeckis was selected. Terry Gilliam turned down the offer to direct.    Barry Sonnenfeld was attached to the film, but left to direct Addams Family Values.   

===Filming=== palmetto trees Chippewa Square in Savannah, Georgia as he sat at a bus stop bench. There were other scenes filmed in and around the Savannah area as well, including a running shot on the Richard V. Woods Memorial Bridge in Beaufort while he was being interviewed by the press, and on West Bay Street in Savannah.  Most of the college campus scenes were filmed in Los Angeles at the University of Southern California. The lighthouse that Forrest runs across to reach the Atlantic Ocean the first time is the Marshall Point Lighthouse in Port Clyde, Maine.

===Visual effects===
 . A variety of visual effects were used to incorporate Tom Hanks into archive footage with various historical figures and events.]] CGI techniques, blue screen along with reference markers so that he could line up with the archive footage.    To record the voices of the historical figures, voice doubles were hired and special effects were used to alter Lip sync#In films|lip-syncing for the new dialogue.    Archival footage was used and with the help of such techniques as chroma key, image warping, morphing, and rotoscoping, Hanks was integrated into it.

In one Vietnam War scene, Gump carries Bubba away from an incoming napalm attack. To create the effect, stunt actors were initially used for compositing purposes. Then, Hanks and Williamson were filmed, with Williamson supported by a cable wire as Hanks ran with him. The explosion was then filmed, and the actors were digitally added to appear just in front of the explosions. The jet fighters and napalm canisters were also added by CGI.   

The CGI removal of actor Gary Sinises legs, after his character had them amputated, was achieved by wrapping his legs with a blue fabric, which later facilitated the work of the "roto-paint" team to paint out his legs from every single frame. At one point, while hoisting himself into his wheelchair, his legs are used for support.   
 peace rally Reflecting Pool extras were quadrant away from the camera. With the help of computers, the extras were multiplied to create a crowd of several hundred thousand people.  

==Release==

===Critical reception===
The film received generally positive reviews. The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 72% of critics gave the film a positive review based on a sample of 79&nbsp;reviews.    At the website Metacritic the film earned a rating of 82/100 based on 19&nbsp;reviews by mainstream critics.    

The story was commended by several critics.  ."   
 Huckleberry Finn, Baby Boomer generation projected their memories of those events.   

The film is commonly seen as a polarizing one for audiences, with Entertainment Weekly writing in 2004, "Nearly a decade after it earned gazillions and swept the Oscars, Robert Zemeckiss ode to 20th-century America still represents one of cinemas most clearly drawn lines in the sand. One half of folks see it as an artificial piece of pop melodrama, while everyone else raves that its sweet as a box of chocolates."   

===Box office performance=== Jurassic Park).    

The film took 66&nbsp;days to surpass $250&nbsp;million and was the fastest grossing Paramount film to pass $100&nbsp;million, $200&nbsp;million, and $300&nbsp;million in box office receipts (at the time of its release).          The film had gross receipts of $329,694,499 in the U.S. and Canada and $347,693,217 in international markets for a total of $677,387,716 worldwide.  Even with such revenue, the film was known as a "successful failure"—due to distributors and exhibitors high fees, Paramounts "losses" clocked in at $62 million, leaving executives realizing the necessity of better deals.  This has, however, also been associated with Hollywood accounting, where expenses are inflated in order to minimize profit sharing. It is Robert Zemeckis highest-grossing film to date.

===Home media===
Forrest Gump was first released on VHS tape on April 27, 1995, as a two-disc Laserdisc set on April 28, 1995, (including the "Through the Eyes of Forrest" special feature), before being released in a two-disc DVD set on August 28, 2001. Special features included director and producer commentaries, production featurettes, and screen tests.    The film was released on Blu-ray disc in November 2009.   

===Accolades===
  Best Director Best Motion Best Fantasy Best Supporting Actor (Film).
 100 Years...100 100 Years...100 100 Years...100 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes.    The film also ranked at number 240 on Empire (film magazine)|Empire s list of the 500 Greatest Movies of All Time. 

In December 2011, Forrest Gump was selected for preservation in the Library of Congress National Film Registry.  The Registry said that the film was "honored for its technological innovations (the digital insertion of Gump seamlessly into vintage archival footage), its resonance within the culture that has elevated Gump (and what he represents in terms of American innocence) to the status of folk hero, and its attempt to engage both playfully and seriously with contentious aspects of the eras traumatic history." 

American Film Institute Lists
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Movies – #71
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Laughs – Nominated
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Passions – Nominated
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:
** Forrest Gump – Nominated Hero
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:
** "Mama always said life was like a box of chocolates. You never know what youre gonna get." – #40
** "Mama says, Stupid is as stupid does." – Nominated
* AFIs 100 Years of Film Scores – Nominated
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Cheers – #37
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) – #76
* AFIs 10 Top 10 – Nominated Epic Film

==Author controversy== Forrest Gump and was contracted for a 3&nbsp;percent share of the films net profits.    However, Paramount and the films producers did not pay him, using Hollywood accounting to posit that the blockbuster film lost money. Tom Hanks, by contrast, contracted for the films gross receipts instead of a salary, and he and director Zemeckis each received $40&nbsp;million.     Additionally, Groom was not mentioned once in any of the films six Oscar-winner speeches.   

Grooms dispute with Paramount was later effectively resolved after Groom declared he was satisfied with Paramounts explanation of their accounting, this coinciding with Groom receiving a 7-figure contract with Paramount for film rights to another of his books, titled Gump & Co. 

==Symbolism==
 

===Feather===
 
 the unbearable lightness of being? Forrest Gumps impaired intellect? The randomness of experience?"    Hanks interpreted the feather as: "Our destiny is only defined by how we deal with the chance elements to our life and thats kind of the embodiment of the feather as it comes in. Here is this thing that can land anywhere and that it lands at your feet. It has theological implications that are really huge."    Sally Field compared the feather to fate, saying: "It blows in the wind and just touches down here or there. Was it planned or was it just perchance?"    Visual effects supervisor Ken Ralston compared the feather to an abstract painting: "It can mean so many things to so many different people."   
 Curious George, Forrests favorite book, which his mother read to him, connecting the scenes present time with his childhood in the 1940s. The placement of the feather in the book is directly on a picture of the monkey walking on a tightrope. Whether that was intentional or not, it is very symbolic. The feather also has a correlation with Jennys constant obsession with "becoming a bird and flying far far away" due to the abuse (sexual and physical) she endured from her father. She goes as far in the film as to ask Forrest "if   jumped off the bridge, could   fly?"

===Political interpretations===
In Tom Hanks words, "The film is non-political and thus non-judgmental."  Nevertheless, in 1994, CNNs Crossfire (TV series)|Crossfire debated whether the film promoted conservative values or was an indictment of the counterculture movement of the 1960s. Thomas Byers, in a Modern Fiction Studies article, called the film "an aggressively conservative film".   

 
It has been noted that while Gump follows a very conservative lifestyle, Currans life is full of countercultural embrace, complete with drug usage, promiscuity, and antiwar rallies, and that their eventual marriage might be a kind of reconciliation.  Jennifer Hyland Wang argued in a Cinema Journal article that Currans death to an unnamed virus "...symbolizes the death of liberal America and the death of the protests that defined a decade  ." She also notes that the films screenwriter, Eric Roth, when developing the screenplay from the novel, had "...transferred all of Gumps flaws and most of the excesses committed by Americans in the 1960s and 1970s to her  ." 
 Newt Gingrichs traditional, conservative values. Jennifer Hyland Wang observes that the film idealizes the 1950s, as evidenced by the lack of "whites only" signs in Gumps southern childhood, and "revisions" the 1960s as a period of social conflict and confusion. She argues that this sharp contrast between the decades criticizes the counterculture values and reaffirms conservatism.  As viewed by political scientist Joe Paskett,  this film is "one of the best films of all time".    Wang argued that the film was used by Republican politicians to illustrate a "traditional version of recent history" to gear voters towards their ideology for the congressional elections.  In addition, presidential candidate Bob Dole cited the films message in influencing his campaign due to its "...message that has made   one of Hollywoods all-time greatest box office hits: no matter how great the adversity, the American Dream is within everybodys reach." 

In 1995, National Review included Forrest Gump in its list of the "Best 100 Conservative Movies" of all time.    Then, in 2009, the magazine ranked the film number four on its 25 Best Conservative Movies of the Last 25 Years list.    "Tom Hanks plays the title character, an amiable dunce who is far too smart to embrace the lethal values of the 1960s. The love of his life, wonderfully played by Robin Wright Penn, chooses a different path; she becomes a drug-addled hippie, with disastrous results." 

James Burton, a communication arts professor at Salisbury University, argued that conservatives claimed Forrest Gump as their own due less to the content of the film and more to the historical and cultural context of 1994. Burton claimed that the films content and advertising campaign were affected by the cultural climate of the 1990s, which emphasized family values and "American values"—values epitomized in the successful book Hollywood vs. America. He claimed that this climate influenced the apolitical nature of the film, which allowed for many different political interpretations.   

Burton points out that many conservative critics and magazines (John Simon, James Bowman, the World Report) initially either criticized the film or praised it only for its non-political elements. Only after the popularity of the film was well-established did conservatives embrace the film as an affirmation of traditional values. Burton implies that the liberal-left could have prevented the conservatives from claiming rights to the film, had it chosen to vocalize elements of the film such as its criticism of military values. Instead, the liberal-left focused on what the film omitted, such as the feminist and civil rights movements. 

Some commentators see the conservative readings of Forrest Gump as indicants of the death of irony in American culture. Vivian Sobchack notes that the films humor and irony relies on the assumption of the audiences historical (self-) consciousness. 

==Soundtrack==
 
The 32-song soundtrack from the film was released on July 6, 1994. With the exception of a lengthy suite from Alan Silvestris score, all the songs are previously released; the soundtrack includes songs from Elvis Presley, Fleetwood Mac, Creedence Clearwater Revival, Aretha Franklin, Lynyrd Skynyrd, Three Dog Night, The Byrds, The Doors, The Mamas & the Papas, The Doobie Brothers, Simon & Garfunkel, Bob Seger, and Buffalo Springfield among others. Music producer Joel Sill reflected on compiling the soundtrack: "We wanted to have very recognizable material that would pinpoint time periods, yet we didnt want to interfere with what was happening cinematically."    The two-disc album has a variety of music from the 1950s–1980s performed by American artists. According to Sills, this was due to Zemeckis request, "All the material in there is American. Bob (Zemeckis) felt strongly about it. He felt that Forrest wouldnt buy anything but American." 
 score for the film was composed and conducted by Alan Silvestri and released on August 2, 1994.

==Possible sequel==
 
The screenplay for the sequel was written by Eric Roth in 2001. It is based on the original novels sequel, Gump and Co. that was written by Winston Groom in 1995. Roths script begins with Forrest sitting on a bench waiting for his son to return from school. After the September 11 attacks, Roth, Zemeckis, and Hanks decided the story was no longer "relevant."    In March 2007, however, it was reported that Paramount producers took another look at the screenplay.   
 The David Letterman Show and attending the Academy Awards.

==References==
 

==External links==
 
 
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 